docs: document state-controller durability and crash recovery (#4867)
NVIDIA/bare-metal-manager-core: docs/architecture/state_handling.md

whether a resource has exceeded it. Deployments can use those measurements for alerting.

## Scheduling and Outcomes

### Enqueue Work

Each controller owns a
[`StateControllerConfig`](https://github.com/NVIDIA/infra-controller/blob/main/crates/state-controller-common/src/config.rs)
instance. The
[`StateControllerConfig` reference](https://github.com/NVIDIA/infra-controller/blob/main/crates/api-core/src/cfg/README.md#statecontrollerconfig)
lists all scheduling settings and defaults. Controllers receive work through three paths:

- **Periodic enqueue:** Each controller periodically enqueues its resources according to `iteration_time`.
- **Transition enqueue:** After a committed transition, finalization schedules an immediate requeue.
- **Explicit enqueue:** Other control-plane components can request an earlier run through the
  [`Enqueuer`](https://github.com/NVIDIA/infra-controller/blob/main/crates/state-controller/src/controller/enqueuer.rs).

Explicit enqueue is idempotent and does not interrupt active handling. When the resource is already queued or claimed,
the request does not create a second queue entry. If active handling does not schedule another run, finalization can

> remove that wake-up with the current queue row. Periodic scheduling then remains the fallback.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
remove that wake-up with the current queue row. Periodic scheduling is the fallback.
```

Author: Done!

### Claim Work and Guard Writes

Before dispatching work, the processor claims queued resources in the database. The processor bounds one handling
attempt with `max_object_handling_time`.

Each processor attempts to handle up to `max_concurrency` resources at the same time. It checks for more work according
to `processor_dispatch_interval`.

Another processor can reclaim a queue row after its `processing_started_at` timestamp is older than 3 times the
configured timeout. The queue claim coordinates dispatch. It does not fence the lifecycle-state write or an external
effect.

The processor passes `old_version` and `new_version` to `persist_controller_state`, but those values do not enforce a
guard by themselves. Each `StateControllerIO` implementation must apply the conflict protection that its storage model
requires. Common guards include:

- An optimistic version predicate
- An owner or claim predicate

> - A transactionally locked reread

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A transactionally-locked reread
```

Author: Fixed!

### Record Errors and Diagnose Retries

Failures alter normal outcome handling as follows:

- **SLA overrun:** A successful `Wait` or `DoNothing` result becomes an SLA error after the resource exceeds its
  state-specific SLA. Successful handler-owned writes still commit.
- **Handler error:** Controller state remains unchanged. The processor discards queued handler writes and tries to
  persist an error outcome in a new transaction.
- **Load error or missing object:** Processing stops before the handler runs. The processor records the error in logs
  and configured metrics but does not persist an outcome.
- **Timeout or persistence failure:** An outcome record is not guaranteed. Logs and configured metrics still report the
  failure, and a later enqueue can retry the resource.

The processor cannot roll back an external effect or database work that a handler committed independently.
A timeout also does not prove that remote or independently spawned work stopped. Treat a timed-out external call as
ambiguous and reconcile it before retrying.

Persistence and handler timeouts can also roll back an uncommitted transition, including its state, history, outcome,

> and handler-owned writes. The next run then observes the previous durable state and must recover from that fact.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and handler-owned writes. The next run observes the previous durable state and must recover from that fact.
```

Author: Updated!

`WorkLock` is an expiring lease. Its keepalive loop can lose the lease while the caller continues running. Keeping the
Rust value in scope is not proof of current ownership.

Use the lease as follows:

- **Database writes:** Call `WorkLock::fence_transaction` before protected writes and perform those writes in the same
  short transaction. Treat every fencing error, including a database query failure, as a failed fence. Roll back or
  discard the transaction.
- **Retries:** Retry protected database writes only in a new transaction after `fence_transaction` succeeds there.
- **External effects:** Apply external fencing or compare-and-set, safe repetition, serialization, and reconciliation as
  required.
- **After ownership loss:** Continue read-only discovery only when it is safe without the lease. Acquire a new lock and
  reestablish every required protection before mutating external state.

Nominal lease expiry does not prove that ownership is lost. If no takeover has changed the worker ID,
`fence_transaction` can still succeed and serialize a later takeover behind the transaction. Do not use elapsed time as

> proof of ownership or loss.

Reviewer: But how do I renew my lease? Will a successful fenced transaction renew it, or do I need to do something else?

`fence_transaction` protects database writes against takeover through the same work key. A writer that bypasses that

> key remains unfenced. External effects also need every applicable protection.

Reviewer: This could be a bit clearer to emphasize that you MUST NOT bypass the key — is bypassing it even possible, or is a fenced transaction the only kind you can do?

### Protect Shared External Resources

A per-resource controller claim does not protect an external resource shared by several NICo resources. Apply every
protection that the external operation requires:

- Reject stale writers through external fencing or compare-and-set.
- Serialize live operations when overlap is unsafe.

> - Make retries idempotent or otherwise safe to repeat.

Reviewer: Is it retries specifically that you want to be idempotent, or all attempted transactions, whether it's time 1 or 100?

- Reconcile ambiguous outcomes before making another change.

These protections solve different problems. One does not replace another.

> If a required protection is unavailable, defer or reject the transition. Record an actionable error instead of

Reviewer: Do you mean "transaction" here? I realize we're talking about state transitions, but just before this, we were talking transactions, so I wanted to check.

modifying the shared resource.

### Document and Test the Recovery Invariant

For each transition, document these facts:

- The durable fact at every crash point
- What the next run can observe

> - The safe action for absent, complete, partial, unwanted, and unknown results

Reviewer: Since this isn't quite alphabetical anyway...

```suggestion
- The safe action for complete, absent, partial, unwanted, and unknown results
```

Author: Applied!
